In this module, we'll be
talking a lot about how
we pay for and transact for
the goods that we purchase.
So I'm going to start by
telling you a little bit
about the history
of payment methods,
and then talk to you
a little bit about
the inherently two-sided nature
of this market and why that
makes it quite unique
relative to normal sort
of goods transaction
purchases that we do.
I'm going to talk a little bit
about the growth of
the credit card industry
in particular,
and problems that have
emerged in this industry,
and the way that regulation
has tried to solve
these problems,
and perhaps the way that
financial technology can solve
these problems in the future.
Just to start in sort of level
the playing field
for us a little bit,
what is and how historically
have we transacted for goods?
This is a question
that has been with
us since the beginning of time,
and it takes us back to long,
long ago when we
used to barter or
exchange actual goods
with one another.
The issue with this bartering
in this slide I present to
you there are bartering horses
for shells for example,
is that there are no real
common standard of value.
Your livestock might be
really valuable to you
but less valuable to the person
you're transacting with.
So whose valuation
should govern in
that particular exchange
is a difficult question.
It's also quite inefficient
as a means of exchange
every time you
want to exchange your livestock
for some shells,
you have to carry these goods
around with you to transact.
So understanding that this is
quite inefficient means
of transacting,
we kind of innovated,
and the first series
of innovations
had to do with using
rare metals or
coins in order to be a store
of value for exchanging
and transacting.
This also pose some issues from
the perspective of those in
engaged in these exchanges.
One issue is that
there's inherently
fluctuation in the value
of the metals like gold,
the silver that you're using
because it depends on how much
gold and silver you have
and your ability to
make those resources
into these coins.
It's also deeply burdensome
to weigh and carry
around every day,
imagine that we only
transacted with quarters.
This would be deeply
inefficient for
all of us and quite cumbersome,
and quarters are much lighter
than the metals that we
were using in
these means of exchange.
So we got to using paper money
as a means of exchange.
This comes to us from China where
merchants invented
the first paper money,
and by the 19th
century paper money
was very common in Europe.
This while a significant
advancement that
got rid of some of
the inefficiencies of for example
having to carry around
metals with you,
or being concerned about
the fact that there
are fluctuations in
these values depending on
the resources that
you have available,
is still not a perfect
payment structure
by any means because there are
real concerns about theft and
the ease of theft when you're
transacting with paper currency,
and also a forgery that
counterfeit notes are going to
emerge and people are going to
be able to transact with them.
They kind of more modern
innovation we still
obviously have paper money,
but in the early 1950s,
we introduced
the first credit cards
as a means of transacting.
This had a lot of advantages from
the perspective of
the consumer who's
able to now transact with
a single payment instrument
that they have in their wallet,
rather than a host of paper bills
or a lot of coins that they're
carrying around with them.
So there's certainly
efficiency gains for consumers.
There are problems as well for
the perspective of
both consumers and merchants.
From the consumer perspective
you worry about things like
credit card fraud which has
emerged as a leading concern.
From the merchant perspective,
the nature of these markets
which we're going to spend
some time talking
about in this lecture,
resulted in a few
large card networks
having considerable control
over this market,
and that creates some problems
that regulation is
trying to address.
From the merchant perspective,
the main problem is
that the fees for
processing these transactions
tend to be very large.
This is a concern both for
antitrust regulation but
also a concern for financial
innovation going forward.